|project|
=========

|project| is a Sphinx extension for `literalizer`_, which converts JSON, YAML,
TOML, and JSON5 data structures to native language literal syntax (Python,
TypeScript, Go, etc.).

Installation
------------

Requires Python |minimum-python-version|\+.

.. code-block:: shell

   pip install sphinx-literalizer


Usage
-----

Add to your Sphinx :file:`conf.py`:

.. code-block:: python

   extensions = [
       # ...
       "sphinx_literalizer",
   ]

Then use the ``literalizer`` directive in your ``.rst`` files:

.. code-block:: rst

   .. literalizer:: path/to/data.json
      :language: python

This reads the data file and renders its contents as a native Python literal
in a code block. Input format is auto-detected from the file extension
(``.json``, ``.yaml``/``.yml``, ``.toml``, ``.json5``), or can be set
explicitly with ``:input-format:``.

Directive options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``:language:`` (required)
   Target language name.
   Supported values: ``ada``, ``bash``, ``c``, ``clojure``, ``cobol``,
   ``common-lisp``, ``cpp``, ``crystal``, ``csharp``, ``d``, ``dart``,
   ``dhall``, ``elixir``, ``elm``, ``erlang``, ``fortran``, ``fsharp``,
   ``forth``, ``gleam``, ``go``, ``groovy``, ``haskell``, ``hcl``,
   ``java``, ``javascript``, ``json5``, ``jsonnet``, ``julia``,
   ``kotlin``, ``lua``, ``matlab``, ``mojo``, ``nim``, ``nix``,
   ``norg``, ``objective-c``, ``ocaml``, ``occam``, ``odin``, ``perl``,
   ``php``, ``powershell``, ``purescript``, ``python``, ``r``,
   ``racket``, ``raku``, ``roc``, ``ruby``, ``rust``, ``scala``,
   ``scheme``, ``sml``, ``swift``, ``systemverilog``, ``tcl``, ``toml``,
   ``typescript``, ``v``, ``vb.net``, ``wren``, ``yaml``, ``zig``.

``:input-format:`` (optional)
   Input data format. If not specified, auto-detected from the file extension.
   Supported values: ``json``, ``json5``, ``yaml``, ``toml``.

``:pre-indent-level:`` (optional)
   Number of indent levels to prepend to each output line.
   Defaults to ``0``.

``:indent:`` (optional)
   Number of whitespace characters used for one level of indentation.
   Defaults to ``4``.

``:indent-char:`` (optional)
   Type of whitespace for indentation: ``spaces`` (default) or ``tabs``.

``:include-delimiters:`` (optional flag)
   Include collection delimiters in the output
   (``[`` … ``]`` for arrays, ``{`` … ``}`` for dicts).

``:collection-layout:`` (optional)
   How to render collections nested inside other collections.
   Supported values:

   ``compact``
      Keep nested collections on one line (default).
   ``multiline``
      Render non-empty nested collections with one element per line.

``:include-preamble:`` (optional flag)
   Include language preamble lines (imports, package declarations, etc.)
   before the generated code.  For example, Go code will be preceded by
   ``package main``, Rust by ``use std::collections::HashMap;``, etc.
   Has no effect when the language does not require a preamble.

``:preamble-only:`` (optional flag)
   Emit the generated preamble without the data literal or function-call
   code.  This lets a composed snippet place declarations and imports at
   file scope, then use a second ``literalizer`` or ``literalizer-call``
   directive without ``:include-preamble:`` to place the generated code
   later (for example, inside C++ ``main``) without duplicating the
   preamble.

``:language-version:`` (optional)
   Target language version.  Values are language-specific enum member
   names in lowercase, e.g. ``py39`` for Python, ``jdk_11`` for Java,
   ``ada_2022`` for Ada, and ``cpp14``, ``cpp17``, or ``cpp20`` for
   C++ (the default).  Select C++14 or C++17 when generated code must
   avoid C++20-only field-name syntax.  Some other
   languages also expose more than one version (e.g. ``v2003`` and
   ``v2008`` for Fortran); unsupported values raise an error.

``:ref-case:`` (optional)
   Case conversion for reference markers in the input data.  Supported
   values: ``camel``, ``kebab``, ``pascal``, ``snake``, ``upper_snake``.
   When set, a single-key mapping such as ``{"$ref": "user_obj"}``
   renders as a bare identifier instead of a literal dictionary.

``:ref-key:`` (optional)
   Marker key used with ``:ref-case:`` to detect references.  Defaults
   to ``$ref``.  For example, with ``:ref-key: $reference`` the mapping
   ``{"$reference": "user_obj"}`` is treated as a reference marker.

``:module-name:`` (optional)
   Module or wrapper name used by languages whose ``:wrap-in-file:``
   output introduces a named scope.  The value is converted to the case
   expected by the selected language.

``:record-struct-name-prefix:`` (optional)
   Name prefix for the structs / records / classes generated by
   ``:heterogeneous-strategy: record`` (the auto-generated names are
   this prefix followed by an index, e.g. ``Record0``).  Defaults to
   ``Record``.  Available for C++, Go, Java, Kotlin, Python, Rust, and
   Scala; using it with any other language raises an error.

``:heterogeneous-value-name:`` (optional)
   Name for the generated carrier type used by heterogeneous scalar
   collections.  It forwards to the selected language's variant, enum,
   or union name setting.  Available for C++, Rust, Mojo, Nim, and Dhall;
   using it with another language raises an ``ExtensionError``.  For
   example, C++14 can use ``:heterogeneous-value-name: TaskValue`` with
   ``:heterogeneous-strategy: record`` to generate a self-contained
   ``TaskValue`` carrier declaration.

``:record-shape-names:`` (optional)
   Custom names for specific record shapes generated by
   ``:heterogeneous-strategy: record``, given as a semicolon-separated
   list of ``key1,key2=Name`` entries.  Each entry maps a record's set
   of keys to the name used instead of the auto-generated one; for
   example ``x,y=Point; a,b,c=Vec3``.  The name must be a valid
   PascalCase identifier for the selected language and must not collide
   with the auto-generated names or with another entry.  For C++, the
   name refers to an externally declared struct, so literalizer emits no
   duplicate declaration; C++14 record lists use an explicit type such
   as ``std::vector<Task>{...}``.  Available for C++, Go, Java, Kotlin,
   Rust, and Scala; using it with any other language raises an error.

``:record-null-substitutions:`` (optional)
   A JSON object mapping record field names to values that replace source
   ``null`` values in those fields. The substitutions are language-neutral
   JSON values and participate in normal type inference. For example, use a
   canonical task fixture with C++14 sentinel values::

      .. literalizer:: _examples/task.json
         :language: cpp
         :language-version: cpp14
         :heterogeneous-strategy: record
         :record-shape-names: task_id,assignee,status=Task
         :record-null-substitutions: {"task_id": -1, "assignee": ""}

   This replaces null ``task_id`` and ``assignee`` values with ``-1`` and an
   empty string while leaving null values in other fields unchanged.

``:wrap-in-file:`` (optional flag)
   Wrap the generated code in a complete file/module when the selected
   language supports that mode.

``:date-format:`` (optional)
   How to render YAML dates.  Not all values are valid for every
   language.  Supported values:

   ``cpp``
      ``std::chrono::year_month_day`` type.
   ``csharp``
      ``new DateOnly(...)`` constructor.
   ``dart``
      ``DateTime.parse(...)`` constructor.
   ``go``
      ``time.Date(...)`` call.
   ``iso``
      Quoted ISO 8601 string (e.g. ``"2024-01-15"``).  This is the
      default for most languages.
   ``java``
      ``LocalDate.of(...)`` constructor.
   ``js``
      ``new Date(...)`` constructor (JavaScript/TypeScript).
   ``julia``
      ``Date(...)`` constructor.
   ``kotlin``
      ``LocalDate.of(...)`` constructor.
   ``objc``
      Objective-C date representation.
   ``php``
      PHP date representation.
   ``python``
      ``datetime.date(...)`` constructor.
   ``r``
      ``as.Date(...)`` call.
   ``ruby``
      ``Date.new(...)`` constructor.
   ``rust``
      ``NaiveDate::from_ymd_opt(...)`` call.
   ``toml``
      TOML date literal.
   ``yaml``
      YAML date literal.

``:datetime-format:`` (optional)
   How to render YAML datetimes.  Not all values are valid for every
   language.  Supported values:

   ``cpp``
      ``std::chrono`` datetime type.
   ``csharp``
      ``new DateTime(...)`` constructor.
   ``dart``
      ``DateTime.parse(...)`` constructor.
   ``epoch``
      Seconds since Unix epoch (e.g. ``1705314600.0``).
   ``go``
      ``time.Date(...)`` call.
   ``instant``
      ``Instant.parse(...)`` (Java).
   ``iso``
      Quoted ISO 8601 string.  This is the default for most languages.
   ``js``
      ``new Date(...)`` constructor (JavaScript/TypeScript).
   ``julia``
      ``DateTime(...)`` constructor.
   ``kotlin``
      ``LocalDateTime.of(...)`` constructor.
   ``objc``
      Objective-C datetime representation.
   ``php``
      PHP datetime representation.
   ``python``
      ``datetime.datetime(...)`` constructor.
   ``r``
      ``as.POSIXct(...)`` call.
   ``ruby``
      ``Time.new(...)`` constructor.
   ``rust``
      ``NaiveDateTime::new(...)`` call.
   ``toml``
      TOML datetime literal.
   ``yaml``
      YAML datetime literal.
   ``zoned``
      ``ZonedDateTime.of(...)`` (Java).

``:sequence-format:`` (optional)
   How to render sequences (arrays/lists).  Not all values are valid for
   every language.  Supported values:

   ``array``
      Array delimiters.  Available for Crystal (default), Julia (default),
      Rust, and many other languages.
   ``cell_array``
      Cell array delimiters.  Available for MATLAB (default).
   ``initializer_list``
      Initializer list.  Available for C++ (default).
   ``list``
      List delimiters.  Available for Elixir (default), Erlang (default),
      Python, and many other languages.
   ``sequence``
      Sequence delimiters.  Available for COBOL (default) and YAML
      (default).
   ``slice``
      Slice delimiters.  Available for Go (default).
   ``table``
      Table delimiters.  Available for Lua (default).
   ``tuple``
      Tuple delimiters.  Available for Crystal, Elixir, Erlang, Julia,
      Python (default for Python), and Rust.
   ``vec``
      Vec macro (``vec![...]``).  Available for Rust (default).
   ``vector``
      Vector delimiters.  Available for Clojure (default).

``:set-format:`` (optional)
   How to render sets (Python only).  Supported values:

   ``set``
      ``{`` … ``}`` set literal (default).
   ``frozenset``
      ``frozenset({`` … ``})`` constructor.

``:bytes-format:`` (optional)
   How to render binary data (Python only).  Supported values:

   ``hex``
      Hex-escaped bytes literal, e.g. ``b"\x48\x65"`` (default).
   ``python``
      Python bytes literal, e.g. ``b"Hello"``.

``:variable-name:`` (optional)
   Wrap the output in a variable declaration or assignment using the given
   name.  Use with ``:include-delimiters:`` to include the collection
   delimiters.

``:existing-variable:`` (optional flag)
   When combined with ``:variable-name:``, produce an assignment to an
   existing variable (e.g. ``x = ...``) instead of a new variable
   declaration (e.g. ``final x = ...`` in Dart).  Has no effect without
   ``:variable-name:``.

``:modifiers:`` (optional)
   Comma-separated modifier keywords to add to a new variable
   declaration, e.g. ``public,static,final``.  Requires
   ``:variable-name:`` and cannot be combined with
   ``:existing-variable:``.  Supported values depend on the language:

   ``C++``
      ``static``, ``const``.
   ``C#``
      ``public``, ``private``, ``protected``, ``static``, ``const``,
      ``readonly``.
   ``Java``
      ``public``, ``private``, ``protected``, ``static``, ``final``.
   ``Rust``
      ``mut`` (a mutable ``let mut`` binding, so the bound value can be
      mutated through the binding).

``:variable-type-hints:`` (optional)
   Whether to add type hints to variable declarations.
   Supported values:

   ``auto``
      Type hints are added when the language requires them (default).
   ``always``
      Always add type annotation, e.g. ``my_var: dict[str, Any] = {...}``.
      Currently available for Python only.

``:comment-format:`` (optional)
   How to render comments.  Not all values are valid for every language.
   Supported values:

   ``apostrophe``
      ``'`` comments.  Available for Visual Basic.
   ``block``
      Block comments (``/* ... */`` or equivalent).  Available for C,
      C#, C++, Common Lisp, D, Dart, F#, Go, Groovy, Haskell, HCL,
      Java, JavaScript, Julia, Kotlin, Lua, MATLAB, Nim, Objective-C,
      PHP, PowerShell, Racket, Rust, Scala, Swift, TypeScript.
   ``double_dash``
      ``--`` comments.  Available for Ada, Haskell, Lua, Occam.
   ``double_slash``
      ``//`` comments.  Available for C, C#, C++, D, Dart, F#, Go,
      Groovy, Java, JavaScript, Kotlin, Objective-C, PHP, Rust, Scala,
      Swift, TypeScript, Zig.
   ``exclamation``
      ``!`` comments.  Available for Fortran.
   ``hash``
      ``#`` comments.  Available for Bash, Crystal, Elixir, HCL, Julia,
      Mojo, Nim, Perl, PowerShell, Python, R, Ruby, TOML, YAML.
   ``paren_star``
      ``(* ... *)`` comments.  Available for OCaml.
   ``percent``
      ``%`` comments.  Available for Erlang, MATLAB, Norg.
   ``semicolon``
      ``;`` comments.  Available for Clojure, Common Lisp, Racket.
   ``star_angle``
      ``*>`` comments.  Available for COBOL.

``:declaration-style:`` (optional)
   How to declare variables.  Not all values are valid for every
   language.  Supported values:

   ``assign``
      Plain assignment (``x = ...``).  Available for Crystal, Elixir,
      Erlang, Haskell, HCL, Julia, MATLAB, Mojo, PHP, PowerShell,
      Python, R, Ruby, TOML, YAML.
   ``auto``
      ``auto`` keyword.  Available for C++, D.
   ``block``
      Block-level declaration.  Available for Norg.
   ``const``
      ``const`` keyword.  Available for JavaScript, TypeScript, Zig.
   ``declare``
      Language-specific declaration keyword.  Available for Ada, Bash.
   ``def``
      ``def`` keyword.  Available for Clojure, Groovy.
   ``define``
      ``define`` form.  Available for Racket.
   ``defparameter``
      ``defparameter`` form.  Available for Common Lisp.
   ``dim``
      ``Dim`` keyword.  Available for Visual Basic.
   ``final``
      ``final`` keyword.  Available for Dart.
   ``let``
      ``let`` keyword.  Available for F#, JavaScript, OCaml, Rust,
      Swift.
   ``local``
      ``local`` keyword.  Available for Lua.
   ``my``
      ``my`` keyword.  Available for Perl.
   ``short``
      Short variable declaration (``:=``).  Available for Go.
   ``typed``
      Typed declaration.  Available for C, COBOL, Fortran, Objective-C.
   ``val``
      ``val`` keyword.  Available for Kotlin, Occam, Scala.
   ``var``
      ``var`` keyword.  Available for C#, Java, Nim.

``:dict-format:`` (optional)
   How to render dictionaries / maps.  Not all values are valid for
   every language.  Supported values:

   ``default``
      Language-default dict syntax.  Available for most languages.
   ``dict``
      ``Dict(...)`` constructor.  Available for Julia.
   ``dictionary``
      ``Dictionary`` constructor.  Available for C#.
   ``hash_map``
      ``HashMap`` constructor.  Available for Rust.
   ``map``
      ``Map`` constructor.  Available for C++, JavaScript, Kotlin,
      Scala.
   ``map_of_entries``
      ``Map.ofEntries(...)`` constructor.  Available for Java.
   ``object``
      Object literal syntax.  Available for JavaScript, TypeScript.
   ``struct``
      ``struct`` syntax.  Available for MATLAB.

``:integer-format:`` (optional)
   How to render integer values.  Not all values are valid for every
   language.  Supported values:

   ``decimal``
      Decimal integer literal (default for all languages).
   ``hex``
      Hexadecimal integer literal.  Available for JavaScript.

``:numeric-separator:`` (optional)
   Whether to use numeric separators in integer literals.  Supported
   values:

   ``none``
      No separators (default for all languages).
   ``underscore``
      Underscore separators (e.g. ``1_000_000``).  Available for
      JavaScript.

``:numeric-style:`` (optional)
   The numeric literal style.  Supported values:

   ``overloaded``
      Use overloaded numeric type classes (default for Haskell).
   ``explicit``
      Wrap every numeric literal in an explicit constructor.
      Available for Haskell.

``:string-format:`` (optional)
   How to render string values.  Supported values:

   ``double``
      Double-quoted strings (default for all languages).
   ``single``
      Single-quoted strings.  Available for JavaScript.

``:trailing-comma:`` (optional)
   Whether to include a trailing comma after the last element in
   collections.  Supported values:

   ``yes``
      Include trailing comma.  Available for C, C++, Crystal, D, Dart,
      Elixir, Go, Groovy, HCL, JavaScript, Julia, Kotlin, Lua, Mojo,
      Objective-C, Perl, PHP, Python, Ruby, Rust, Scala, Swift,
      TypeScript, Zig.
   ``no``
      Omit trailing comma.  Available for Ada, Bash, C#, Clojure,
      COBOL, Common Lisp, Erlang, F#, Fortran, Haskell, Java,
      JavaScript, MATLAB, Nim, Norg, OCaml, Occam, PowerShell, R,
      Racket, TOML, Visual Basic, YAML.

``:empty-dict-key:`` (optional)
   How to handle empty string keys in dictionaries.
   Supported values:

   ``positional``
      Use positional arguments for empty keys (default).
      Available for R.
   ``error``
      Raise an error on empty keys.  Available for R.

``:heterogeneous-strategy:`` (optional, defaults to ``auto``)
   How to render scalar collections whose elements have more than one
   language-level type.  Defaults to ``auto``; set it explicitly only
   to pin a specific representation (see the caveat under ``auto``).
   Supported values:

   ``auto`` (default)
      Render the input with its natural representation first, and only
      if that fails because the data is heterogeneous, retry with each
      strategy the target language supports in the order given by the
      ``literalizer_heterogeneous_strategy_precedence`` configuration
      value.
      Homogeneous and genuinely map-shaped data keep their native form,
      so a single ``auto`` works across a mix of inputs without picking
      a strategy per project or per file.
      Because ``auto`` chooses a representation implicitly -- ``record``
      vs ``tuple`` vs ``tagged_enum`` changes the shape of the
      generated API -- set ``:heterogeneous-strategy:`` explicitly when
      a specific representation is wanted for clarity.
   ``error``
      Raise an error when a collection mixes scalar types.  This was the
      default before |project| defaulted ``:heterogeneous-strategy:`` to
      ``auto``; set it explicitly to keep a mixed-scalar collection a
      hard build failure.
   ``tagged_enum``
      Emit a minimal tagged ``enum`` in the preamble and wrap each
      heterogeneous value at the call site (e.g. ``Value::I32(1)``).
      Available for Rust.
   ``record``
      Emit a generated struct / record / dataclass declaration in the
      preamble for each record-shaped mapping plus a matching literal
      (e.g. ``Record0{Name: "a", Items: []int{1}}``).  The generated
      names can be customised with ``:record-struct-name-prefix:``;
      ``:record-shape-names:`` is also available where supported.
      Available for C++, Go, Java, Kotlin, Python, Rust, and Scala.
   ``tuple``
      Render a fixed-length heterogeneous scalar array as the
      language's native tuple literal instead of raising (e.g.
      ``std::make_tuple(...)``).  Available for C++ and Rust.

   See :doc:`heterogeneous-strategies` for the full set of strategies (including ``tuple``, ``object_variant``, ``union_type``, ``interface``, and ``variant``), worked examples, and the per-language support matrix.

``:skip-if-unrepresentable:`` (optional, flag)
   Emit no node at all -- instead of failing the build -- when the
   input cannot be represented in the target language, including after
   ``:heterogeneous-strategy: auto`` exhausts its precedence.  This lets
   a loop that renders the same data in several languages skip the
   languages a given input does not fit, without moving data-shape
   knowledge into the surrounding prose or template.

``:call-style:`` (optional)
   How ``literalizer-call`` renders function calls.  Each language
   offers its own set of call styles; using a value a language does not
   support raises an error.  Supported values:

   ``positional``
      Pass arguments by position (e.g. ``myFunc({...})``).  Available
      for C, C#, C++, Crystal, D, F#, Go, Groovy, HCL, Haskell, Java,
      JavaScript, Julia, Kotlin, Lua, Perl, PHP, Python, R, Ruby, Rust,
      Scala, TypeScript.
   ``keyword``
      Pass arguments by keyword (e.g. ``my_func(flag=True)``).
      Available for Crystal, Groovy, Jsonnet, Julia, Kotlin, PHP,
      Python, R, Ruby, Scala, Swift.
   ``named``
      Pass arguments by named colon syntax (e.g.
      ``MyFunc(flag: true)``).  Available for C#.
   ``object``
      Pass arguments as a single object literal (e.g.
      ``myFunc({ obj: {...} })``).  Available for JavaScript,
      TypeScript.
   ``prefix_keyword``
      Pass arguments as prefixed keyword pairs in an S-expression
      (e.g. ``(process :flag t)``).  Available for Common Lisp,
      Racket.
   ``postfix``
      Push arguments before naming the function (e.g. ``1 2 ADD``).
      Available for Forth.

Example
~~~~~~~

Given a file :file:`_examples/literal.json` containing:

.. literalinclude:: _examples/literal.json
   :language: json

the ``literalizer`` directive renders both its directive source and the
generated code block:

.. rest-example::

   .. literalizer:: _examples/literal.json
      :language: python
      :include-delimiters:


``literalizer-call`` directive
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``literalizer-call`` directive converts data files into function call
expressions.  Each top-level list element becomes a separate call (when
``:per-element:`` is set), with its values mapped positionally to the
given parameter names.

Given a file :file:`_examples/calls.json` containing:

.. literalinclude:: _examples/calls.json
   :language: json

the directive renders as:

.. rest-example::

   .. literalizer-call:: _examples/calls.json
      :language: python
      :target-function: my_func
      :parameter-names: flag,count,name
      :per-element:

For positional-call languages like Go, :file:`_examples/calls_go.json`
containing:

.. literalinclude:: _examples/calls_go.json
   :language: json

renders as:

.. rest-example::

   .. literalizer-call:: _examples/calls_go.json
      :language: go
      :target-function: myFunc
      :parameter-names: flag,count
      :per-element:

A no-argument constructor bound to a variable is expressed with an
empty ``:parameter-names:`` (or omitted ``:parameter-names:``),
``:per-element:``, and a single-element source.  Given
:file:`_examples/no_args.yaml` containing:

.. literalinclude:: _examples/no_args.yaml
   :language: yaml

the directive renders the language-idiomatic no-argument construction:

.. rest-example::

   .. literalizer-call:: _examples/no_args.yaml
      :language: rust
      :constructor-class: Playlist
      :per-element:
      :variable-name: p1

``literalizer-call`` directive options
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``:target-function:`` (required unless ``:constructor-class:`` is set)
   The function expression to call (e.g. ``my_func`` or
   ``throttler.should_send_notification``).

``:constructor-class:`` (required unless ``:target-function:`` is set)
   A class/type name whose no-argument constructor should be called using
   the selected language's idiom.  For example, ``Playlist`` renders as
   ``Playlist()``, ``new Playlist()``, ``NewPlaylist()``,
   ``Playlist.new()``, or ``Playlist::new()`` depending on the language.
   This option cannot be combined with ``:target-function:``.

``:parameter-names:`` (optional)
   Comma-separated parameter names, positionally mapped to each
   element in each row.  For positional-call languages (like Go) these
   are unused in the output but still determine how many values to
   expect per row.
   An empty (or omitted) value means the call takes *no* arguments,
   which -- combined with ``:per-element:`` over a single-element
   source and ``:variable-name:`` -- renders a no-argument constructor
   bound to a variable (see the example below).

``:per-element:`` (optional flag)
   When set, each top-level list element becomes a separate function
   call.  Without this flag, the whole literalized value is passed as a
   single argument.

``:omit-code:`` (optional flag)
   Omit the generated call expressions.  Combine this with
   ``:include-preamble:`` to render only imports or other preamble lines,
   which is useful when a later ``literalizer-call`` block needs preamble
   lines at the top of a combined snippet.

``:call-transform:`` (optional)
   A template applied to each generated call.  These placeholders are
   substituted: ``$call`` (and the ``$0`` alias) for the rendered call
   expression, ``$index`` for the zero-based call position, and
   ``$zipped`` for the matching ``:zip-file:`` element rendered as a
   native literal (empty when no ``:zip-file:`` is given).  For example,
   ``:call-transform: result_$index = $call``.

``:zip-file:`` (optional)
   A data file whose top-level elements pair positionally with the
   generated calls.  Each paired element is rendered as a native literal
   and made available to ``:call-transform:`` as ``$zipped``, which is
   handy for generating assertions from a parallel file of expected
   results (e.g. ``:call-transform: assert $call == $zipped``).  The
   file is parsed with the same parser as the main source.

``:zip-input-format:`` (optional)
   The input format (``json``, ``json5``, ``yaml``, or ``toml``) of the
   ``:zip-file:``.  Defaults to the format inferred from the
   ``:zip-file:`` extension.

``:comment-file:`` (optional)
   A text file with one line per generated call.  Each non-blank line
   is emitted as a trailing source comment after the matching call,
   using the target language's comment syntax, and a blank line emits
   no comment for that call.  The number of lines must equal the
   number of generated calls.  Unlike ``:call-transform:``, the
   comment is placed after the statement terminator, so a comment can
   be attached without commenting out the terminator.

The ``literalizer-call`` directive also supports these shared options
from the ``literalizer`` directive: ``:language:``, ``:input-format:``,
``:pre-indent-level:``, ``:indent:``, ``:indent-char:``,
``:include-preamble:``, ``:language-version:``, ``:ref-case:``,
``:ref-key:``, ``:module-name:``, ``:record-struct-name-prefix:``,
``:record-shape-names:``, ``:wrap-in-file:``,
``:collection-layout:``, ``:heterogeneous-strategy:``,
``:skip-if-unrepresentable:``, and all format options (e.g.
``:string-format:``, ``:trailing-comma:``, etc.).

JSON-value call arguments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use ``:json-type:`` with ``literalizer-call`` when a function accepts a
language's runtime JSON-value type.  This keeps each argument as a JSON
value rather than requiring one homogeneous native collection type, so a
call can accept nested or heterogeneous JSON data directly.  For example,
Rust's ``serde_json_value`` renders each argument with ``serde_json::json!``:

.. literalizer-call:: _examples/calls_json.json
   :language: rust
   :target-function: process
   :parameter-names: profile,labels
   :per-element:
   :json-type: serde_json_value

This option is available only for languages and JSON-value variants that
``literalizer`` supports.  Use ``:include-preamble:`` when the generated
snippet also needs its imports.

Heterogeneous call arguments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``:heterogeneous-strategy:`` also applies to arguments generated by
``:per-element:``.  In particular, ``literalizer`` 2026.7.20 collects the
types from every generated argument when it builds the preamble, so a shared
wrapper type is declared once and covers every call:

.. literalizer-call:: _examples/calls_heterogeneous.json
   :language: rust
   :target-function: process
   :parameter-names: value
   :per-element:
   :heterogeneous-strategy: tagged_enum
   :include-preamble:


Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``literalizer_heterogeneous_strategy_precedence``
   The order in which ``:heterogeneous-strategy: auto`` tries
   representational strategies after the natural representation fails.
   It defaults to ``["record", "tuple", "tagged_enum",
   "object_variant", "variant", "union_type", "interface"]`` and is
   restricted, per directive, to the strategies the target language
   exposes (``error`` is never a fallback).  Set it in :file:`conf.py`
   to change which representation ``auto`` prefers, for example to
   prefer a tagged union over a record::

      literalizer_heterogeneous_strategy_precedence = [
          "tagged_enum",
          "record",
          "tuple",
      ]

``literalizer_language_defaults``
   Shared format-option defaults for both directives, grouped by the
   directive's ``:language:`` value. Explicit directive options take
   precedence. For example, make all C++ directives use C++14 unless a
   directive selects another version::

      literalizer_language_defaults = {
          "cpp": {
              "language-version": "cpp14",
          },
      }

   This setting accepts the shared language and format options, including
   ``language-version``, ``string-format``, and ``trailing-comma``. It
   does not set directive-specific options such as ``target-function`` or
   ``include-delimiters``.


Reference
---------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 3

   heterogeneous-strategies
   api-reference
   release-process
   unreleased
   changelog
   contributing

.. _literalizer: https://github.com/adamtheturtle/literalizer
